docs(a11y): a11y migration docs for accordion (#6190)
adobe/spectrum-web-components: CONTRIBUTOR-DOCS/03_project-planning/03_components/accordion/accessibility-migration-analysis.md

| **Do not** | Put **`role="button"`** on a **heading** instead of using a **`<button>`** inside the heading ([Inclusive Components](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/)). |

### Shadow DOM and cross-root ARIA Issues

- Under the **preferred** pattern (**heading text** slot + **`heading-level`**), the **`<h*>`**, **`<button>`**, and **`role="region"`** panel usually live in the **same** shadow root with **stable internal ids**. **`aria-controls`** and **`aria-labelledby`** should resolve **without** cross-root **IDREF** wiring, matching the APG accordion example shape.
- If a future variant allows more of the header in **light DOM**, document **id** uniqueness, **`aria-controls`** across roots, or **`ElementInternals`** if used.

### Accessibility tree expectations

**Per expanded item**

- **Heading:** **heading** role at **level** from **`heading-level`** / **`level`**; **button** nested inside (Inclusive / APG shape).
- **Trigger:** **button**, name from slotted **label** text (and optional icon **decorative**).
- **`aria-expanded`:** **`true`** when panel is shown, **`false`** when hidden.

> - **Panel:** **`role="region"`**, named via **`aria-labelledby`** to the trigger (APG). Hidden panels must **not** expose interactive descendants in the tab order ([Collapsible sections](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/) — hidden content not focusable).

Reviewer: A recommended example will help here like
e.g. "Use inert on closed panels; do not rely on tabindex="-1" sweeps"

**Collapsed panels**

- Content **hidden** from **both** sight and accessibility where appropriate (**`hidden`** attribute or equivalent), consistent with implementation.

### Keyboard and focus

- **Tab / Shift+Tab:** Move through **focusable** elements **including** triggers and **focusable content inside open panels** ([APG example](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/accordion/examples/accordion/)).
- **Space:** With focus on the **header `button`**, **toggle** the panel and **`preventDefault()`** on the activating **keyboard** event so **Space does not scroll** the viewport or a scrollable ancestor (common failure in **overflow** regions; see **[SWC-1487](https://jira.corp.adobe.com/browse/SWC-1487)**).
- **Enter:** Match APG: **toggle** or **expand** as documented for your interaction model.

> - **Disabled** items: trigger **not** in interactive tab order (native **`disabled`** **button** behavior).

Reviewer: 1st-gen uses `FocusGroupController` with `direction: 'vertical'` to navigate between headers. It would be great if we can mention whether we should keep or simplify that pattern.

Should we also mention `Up/Down` arrow to move between headers and `Home/End` to jump to first and last.

Author: From @majornista 

> We shouldn't be implementing roving tabindex for accordion headers, which ends up getting confusing with focusable content within the open panels. The WAI-ARIA authoring practice guide suggests that up/down/home/end navigation between accordion header buttons is "optional", but unless you have a ton of interactive controls within each panel, it doesn't reduce navigation effort much in comparison to just navigating between the accordion header buttons. It can also become problematic if you use preventDefault to prevent scrolling when the user presses arrow down or arrow up on a header, because you may incorrectly assume that the user wants to navigate to the next accordion header, when their intent is to scroll the page.

| **Single vs multiple open** | **`swc-accordion`** should support **at most one** expanded item or **multiple** expanded items ([Deque single](https://dequeuniversity.com/library/aria/accordion-single) vs [Deque multiselect](https://dequeuniversity.com/library/aria/accordion-multi)). Behavior must match documented props (e.g. analogous to **`allow-multiple`** on **`sp-accordion`**). |

> | **Heading + button (preferred)** | **Preferred:** expose a **default slot** (or named slot) for **heading label text only**, and a **`heading-level`** / **`level`** property (**`2`–`6`**, mirror **1st-gen** **`level`** on **`sp-accordion`**). **Shadow DOM** renders the **heading element** (`<h2>`–`<h6>` per level) **wrapping** a native **`<button>`** so screen readers get **heading level + button** without **`role="button"`** on the heading. Consumers **do not** pass a full `<h*>` in light DOM; they pass **text** and set **level** for the outline. Document the **slot name**, **defaults**, and **Storybook** examples. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Heading shape (a11y)** | Shadow DOM renders the heading element (`<h2>`–`<h6>` per `level`) wrapping a native **`<button>`** so screen readers get **heading level + button** without **`role="button"`** on the heading ([Inclusive Components](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/)). Consumers do not pass a full `<h*>` in light DOM; they supply text and set `level` for the outline. **`heading-level`** / **`level`** property accepts **`2`–`6`** (mirror 1st-gen **`level`** on **`sp-accordion-item`**). |
| **Heading API (1st-gen → 2nd-gen, breaking)** | 1st-gen exposes a string **`label`** attribute (`AccordionItem.label`) rendered into shadow DOM. 2nd-gen preferred is a **default slot** for heading label text. This is a **breaking API change**—call it out in the migration guide and Storybook. Decisions to record in this doc before implementation: (1) is **`label`** retained as a **fallback** during the migration window? (2) **Precedence** when both `label` and slotted nodes are provided (recommend: **slot wins**, with a dev-mode warning). (3) Accepted slot content (text only vs allowing inline phrasing such as `<strong>` / `<code>`). (4) Slot-change handling: re-evaluate accessible name; no focusable descendants are expected inside the label. |
```

| **Do not** | Put **`role="button"`** on a **heading** instead of using a **`<button>`** inside the heading ([Inclusive Components](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/)). |

### Shadow DOM and cross-root ARIA Issues

- Under the **preferred** pattern (**heading text** slot + **`heading-level`**), the **`<h*>`**, **`<button>`**, and **`role="region"`** panel usually live in the **same** shadow root with **stable internal ids**. **`aria-controls`** and **`aria-labelledby`** should resolve **without** cross-root **IDREF** wiring, matching the APG accordion example shape.
- If a future variant allows more of the header in **light DOM**, document **id** uniqueness, **`aria-controls`** across roots, or **`ElementInternals`** if used.

### Accessibility tree expectations

**Per expanded item**

- **Heading:** **heading** role at **level** from **`heading-level`** / **`level`**; **button** nested inside (Inclusive / APG shape).
- **Trigger:** **button**, name from slotted **label** text (and optional icon **decorative**).
- **`aria-expanded`:** **`true`** when panel is shown, **`false`** when hidden.

> - **Panel:** **`role="region"`**, named via **`aria-labelledby`** to the trigger (APG). Hidden panels must **not** expose interactive descendants in the tab order ([Collapsible sections](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/) — hidden content not focusable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Panel:** **`role="region"`**, named via **`aria-labelledby`** to the trigger (APG). When the panel is not visible, it must **not** expose interactive descendants in the tab order ([Collapsible sections](https://inclusive-components.design/collapsible-sections/)).

**Panel state matrix**

Pick one mechanism per state. **Do not** mix `tabindex="-1"` sweeps with the values below.

| Item state | Mechanism on the panel | Why |
|---|---|---|
| Open + enabled | Visible; in flow; in tab and AT order. | Normal interaction. |
| **Closed** + enabled | **`hidden`** attribute (or equivalent). | Removes the panel from layout, focus, and the accessibility tree in one step. |
| Open or closed + **disabled** | **`inert`** on the panel node. | `inert` applies to the element and its flat-tree descendants—no focus, no AT activation—without removing it from layout if the design needs it visible. |
```

- **Omit (by design):** Roving `tabindex` and optional header-only **arrow** / **Home** / **End** keyboard recipes sometimes described elsewhere. **Accessibility** **Engineering** guidance: keep keyboard behavior aligned with the [APG accordion example](https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/accordion/examples/accordion/) (Tab, Shift+Tab, Space, Enter) so open panels with many focusable children stay usable, and so arrow keys are not captured for the wrong purpose when focus is on a header.
- **Disabled** items: **header** **button** **stays** in the **Tab** **order** and uses **`aria-disabled="true"`**; **Space** / **Enter** / **click** do **not** **toggle**. **Do not** use the HTML **`disabled`** **attribute** on the **header** **button** as the **only** **way** to **disable** if that would **drop** the **header** from **Tab** in your **target** **browsers**—**`aria-disabled`** **preserves** **focus** and **AT** **exposure** in **line** with this **doc**. **Do** **not** use **`tabindex="-1"`** **in** **place** of **`aria-disabled`** (header) or **`inert`** (panel). The **panel** uses **`inert`** so its **subtree** is not **interactive**.

---

## Testing

> ### Automated tests

Reviewer 2: Do we need notes on manual and screen reader testing? Playwright testing? ✨
